
bahussuto hoti sutadharo sutasannicayo, ye te dhammā ādikalyāṇā majjhekalyāṇā pariyosānakalyāṇā sātthaṃ sabyañjanaṃ kevalaparipuṇṇaṃ parisuddhaṃ brahmacariyaṃ abhivadanti, tathārūpāssa dhammā bahussutā honti dhātā vacasā paricitā manasānupekkhitā diṭṭhiyā suppaṭividdhā
He is learned, treasures what he has learned of the Teaching that is good at the beginning, middle and end, full of meanings in words and letters that state the complete and pure holy life. He bears that Teaching, practises it verbally and mentally touches it and penetratingly see it

āraddhavīriyo viharati akusalānaṃ dhammānaṃ pahānāya kusalānaṃ dhammānaṃ upasampadāya thāmavā daḷhaparakkamo anikkhittadhuro kusalesu dhammesu
He abides with aroused effort firm and zealous to dispel demeritorious things and to accumulate meritorious things, not giving up the main aim.

paññavā hoti udayatthagāminiyā paññāya samannāgato ariyāya nibbedhikāya sammā dukkhakkhayagāminiyā
Become wise is endowed with wisdom of the arising and fading of the five holding masses, for the noble penetration, for the rightful ending of unpleasantness.

catunnaṃ jhānānaṃ ābhicetasikānaṃ diṭṭhadhammasukhavihārānaṃ nikāmalābhī hoti akicchalābhī akasiralābhī
becomes the gainer without a wish, without doing anything and quickly, of the four higher states of the mind. The pleasant abidings here and now

āsavānaṃ khayā anāsavaṃ cetovimuttiṃ paññāvimuttiṃ diṭṭheva dhamme sayaṃ abhiññā sacchikatvā upasampajja viharati
Destroying desires, the mind released and released through wisdom, abides having realized here and now

santuṭṭho hoti itarītaracīvarapiṇḍapātasenāsanagilānappaccayabhesajjaparikkhārena
He is satisfied with whatever gain of robes, morsel food, dwellngs and requisites when ill.

so taṃ dhammaṃ sutvā dvayena vūpakāsena sampādeti kāyavūpakāsena ca cittavūpakāsena ca.
hearing the Teaching procures his aim by way of two seclusions, bodily seclusion and mental seclusion.


Āraddhavīriyo viharati – ‘kāmaṃ taco ca nhāru [nahāru (sī. syā. kaṃ. pī.)] ca aṭṭhi ca avasissatu, sarīre upasussatu maṃsalohitaṃ; yaṃ taṃ purisathāmena purisavīriyena purisaparakkamena pattabbaṃ, na taṃ apāpuṇitvā vīriyassa saṇṭhānaṃ bhavissatī’ti.
He is with aroused effort, thinking if it happens my skin, veins and bones remain, may flesh and blood dry up. Until there is strength in me, I will make effort to attain, what could be attained through manly strength and vigour.
	
	
	bhikkhu kalyāṇamitto hoti kalyāṇasahāyo kalyāṇasampavaṅko. sambodhipakkhikānaṃ
	 the bhikkhu becomes a spiritual friend, with good association and good friendship
	 
	 bhikkhu yāyaṃ kathā abhisallekhikā cetovivaraṇasappāyā, seyyathidaṃ appicchakathā santuṭṭhikathā pavivekakathā asaṃsaggakathā vīriyārambhakathā sīlakathā samādhikathā paññākathā vimuttikathā vimuttiñāṇadassanakathā, evarūpiyā kathāya nikāmalābhī hoti akicchalābhī akasiralābhī.
	 the bhikkhu becomes a quick and easy gainer for nothing of such talk about austere penances, providing explanations of the mind's activities such as wanting little, satisfaction, seclusion, not wanting company, arousing effort, talk about virtues, concentration, wisdom, release and talk about knowledge and vision of release
	 
	bhikkhu suvaco hoti sovacassakaraṇehi dhammehi samannāgato khamo padakkhiṇaggāhī anusāsaniṃ
	the bhikkhu is suave, with gentle manners, accepting advice patiently.
	
	bhikkhu yāni tāni sabrahmacārīnaṃ uccāvacāni kiṃkaraṇīyāni V tattha dakkho hoti analaso, tatrūpāyāya vīmaṃsāya samannāgato alaṃ kātuṃ alaṃ saṃvidhātuṃ
	the bhikkhu is with aroused effort, clever and discriminative in doing or getting done whatever things small or large that have to be done for the co-associates in the holy life.
	
	dhammakāmo hoti piyasamudāhāro abhidhamme abhivinaye uḷārapāmojjo
	 Is fond of the Teaching and speaks delightedly about the deeper aspects of the Teaching and discipline
	
	pāsādiko hoti abhikkantapaṭikkante VAR susaṃvuto antaraghare nisajjāya
	Is lovely when approaching and receding and sits inside a house well restrained
	