

MN 53, MN 107, MN 125 gradual path, sekho patipado
same DN 2, DN 10, DN 33 (see all the lists) DN 34


Iti 97 Kalyāṇasīlasuttaṃ
bhikkhu kalyāṇasīlo hoti

Ud 31
bhikkhu sīlavā hoti, pātimokkhasaṃvarasaṃvuto viharati ācāragocarasampanno, aṇumattesu vajjesu bhayadassāvī, samādāya sikkhati sikkhāpadesu. Aparipakkāya, meghiya, cetovimuttiyā ayaṃ dutiyo dhammo paripākāya saṃvattati.
the monk is virtuous. He dwells restrained in accordance with the Patimokkha, consummate in his behavior and sphere of activity. He trains himself, having undertaken the training rules, seeing danger in the slightest faults. In one whose awareness-release is still immature, this is the second quality that brings it to maturity.

an10-97
bhikkhu āhuneyyo hoti pāhuneyyo dakkhiṇeyyo añjalikaraṇīyo anuttaraṃ puññakkhettaṃ lokassa.
‘‘Katamehi dasahi? Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu sīlavā hoti, pātimokkhasaṃvarasaṃvuto viharati ācāragocarasampanno aṇumattesu vajjesu bhayadassāvī, samādāya sikkhati sikkhāpadesu.

an10-50
bhikkhu sīlavā hoti, pātimokkhasaṃvarasaṃvuto viharati ācāragocarasampanno aṇumattesu vajjesu bhayadassāvī, samādāya sikkhati sikkhāpadesu. Yampi, bhikkhave, bhikkhu sīlavā hoti…pe… samādāya sikkhati sikkhāpadesu, ayampi dhammo sāraṇīyo piyakaraṇo garukaraṇo saṅgahāya avivādāya sāmaggiyā ekībhāvāya saṃvattati.
Here, bhikkhus, the bhikkhu is virtuous restrained in the higher code of rules, abides seeing fear in the slightest fault. Bhikkhus, this is a thing conducive to friendliness, to be loved, to be revered, to give up disputes, to bring together and for unity.



an 10-34  the bhikkhu endowed with ten things should give the higher ordination to a bhikkhu
bhikkhu sīlavā hoti, pātimokkhasaṃvarasaṃvuto viharati ācāragocarasampanno aṇumattesu vajjesu bhayadassāvī, samādāya sikkhati sikkhāpadesu; bahussuto hoti sutadharo sutasannicayo, ye te dhammā ādikalyāṇā majjhekalyāṇā pariyosānakalyāṇā sātthaṃ sabyañjanaṃ kevalaparipuṇṇaṃ parisuddhaṃ brahmacariyaṃ abhivadanti, tathārūpāssa dhammā bahussutā honti dhātā vacasā paricitā manasānupekkhitā diṭṭhiyā suppaṭividdhā; pātimokkhaṃ kho panassa vitthārena svāgataṃ hoti suvibhattaṃ suppavattaṃ suvinicchitaṃ suttaso anubyañjanaso; paṭibalo hoti gilānaṃ upaṭṭhātuṃ vā upaṭṭhāpetuṃ vā; paṭibalo hoti anabhiratiṃ vūpakāsetuṃ vā vūpakāsāpetuṃ vā; paṭibalo hoti uppannaṃ kukkuccaṃ dhammato vinodetuṃ; paṭibalo hoti uppannaṃ diṭṭhigataṃ dhammato vivecetuṃ; paṭibalo hoti adhisīle samādapetuṃ; paṭibalo hoti adhicitte samādapetuṃ; paṭibalo hoti adhipaññāya samādapetuṃ. Imehi kho, upāli, dasahi dhammehi samannāgatena bhikkhunā upasampādetabba’’nti.
 the bhikkhu should be virtuous abiding restrained in the higher code of rules, conducting himself seeing fear in the slightest fault. Should be learned, bearing and accumulating the Teaching, good at the beginning, middle and end, full of meanings even in the letters and stating the pure and complete holy life. That Teaching he should recite, and experience with the mind and penetratingly see it, to straighten his view. The higher code of rules, should be well ingrained in him to explain with details by observing it and being able to make decisions by discourses and by words in them. He is immoveably established in the discipline. It is possible for him to see the meanings and the hidden meanings, to give knowledge, to give wisdom, to win over, to make others agree and to make them pleasant. He is clever and can settle arisen disputes. He knows the settlement of disputes, the arising of disputes, the cessation of disputes and the path leading to the cessation of disputes. Upali, the bhikkhu endowed with these ten things should decide the expulsion of a bhikkhu.

an10-33 the bhikkhu endowed with ten things should decide the expulsion of a bhikkhu
bhikkhu sīlavā hoti; pātimokkhasaṃvarasaṃvuto viharati ācāragocarasampanno aṇumattesu vajjesu bhayadassāvī, samādāya sikkhati sikkhāpadesu; bahussuto hoti sutadharo sutasannicayo, ye te dhammā ādikalyāṇā majjhekalyāṇā pariyosānakalyāṇā sātthaṃ sabyañjanaṃ [satthā sabyañjanā (sī.) evamuparipi] kevalaparipuṇṇaṃ parisuddhaṃ brahmacariyaṃ abhivadanti, tathārūpāssa dhammā bahussutā honti dhātā vacasā paricitā manasānupekkhitā diṭṭhiyā suppaṭividdhā; ubhayāni kho panassa pātimokkhāni vitthārena svāgatāni honti suvibhattāni suppavattīni suvinicchitāni suttaso anubyañjanaso; vinaye kho pana ṭhito hoti asaṃhīro; paṭibalo hoti ubho atthapaccatthike saññāpetuṃ paññāpetuṃ nijjhāpetuṃ pekkhetuṃ pasādetuṃ; adhikaraṇasamuppādavūpasamakusalo hoti – adhikaraṇaṃ jānāti; adhikaraṇasamudayaṃ jānāti; adhikaraṇanirodhaṃ jānāti; adhikaraṇanirodhagāminiṃ paṭipadaṃ jānāti. Imehi kho, upāli, dasahi dhammehi samannāgato bhikkhu ubbāhikāya sammannitabbo’’ti.
 the bhikkhu should be virtuous abiding restrained in the higher code of rules, conducting himself seeing fear in the slightest fault. Should be learned, bearing and accumulating the Teaching, good at the beginning, middle and end, full of meanings even in the letters and stating the pure and complete holy life. That Teaching he should recite, and experience with the mind and penetratingly see it, to straighten his view. The higher code of rules, should be well ingrained in him to explain with details by observing it and being able to make decisions by discourses and by words in them. He is immoveably established in the discipline. It is possible for him to see the meanings and the hidden meanings, to give knowledge, to give wisdom, to win over, to make others agree and to make them pleasant. He is clever and can settle arisen disputes. He knows the settlement of disputes, the arising of disputes, the cessation of disputes and the path leading to the cessation of disputes. Upali, the bhikkhu endowed with these ten things should decide the expulsion of a bhikkhu.
 
 
an10-17
bhikkhu sīlavā hoti, pātimokkhasaṃvarasaṃvuto viharati ācāragocarasampanno aṇumattesu vajjesu bhayadassāvī, samādāya sikkhati sikkhāpadesu. Yampi, bhikkhave, bhikkhu sīlavā hoti…pe… samādāya sikkhati sikkhāpadesu, ayampi dhammo nāthakaraṇo.
Here, bhikkhus, the bhikkhu becomes virtuous abiding restrained in the higher code of rules and conducts himself seeing fear in the slightest fault. Bhikkhus, this is also a refuge to the bhikkhu.


an9-3
bhikkhu sīlavā hoti, pātimokkhasaṃvarasaṃvuto viharati ācāragocarasampanno aṇumattesu vajjesu bhayadassāvī, samādāya sikkhati sikkhāpadesu. Aparipakkāya, meghiya, cetovimuttiyā ayaṃ dutiyo dhammo paripakkāya saṃvattati.
the bhikkhu becomes virtuous restrained in the higher code of rules, conducting himself, seeing fear in the slightest fault he observes the rules. Meghiya, for the mind, immature for release this is the second thing leading to maturity


an9-1  
bhikkhu sīlavā hoti, pātimokkhasaṃvarasaṃvuto viharati ācāragocarasampanno aṇumattesu vajjesu bhayadassāvī, samādāya sikkhati sikkhāpadesu. Sambodhipakkhikānaṃ, āvuso, dhammānaṃ ayaṃ dutiyā upanisā bhāvanāya.
the bhikkhu becomes virtuous restrained in the higher code of rules, observing the rules, conducts himself seeing fear in the slightest fault. This is the second means of developing factors associated with enlightenment.


an8-13  the bhikkhu endowed with eight things becomes reverential, ... re ... the incomparable field of merit for the world
Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu sīlavā hoti, pātimokkhasaṃvarasaṃvuto viharati ācāragocarasampanno aṇumattesu vajjesu bhayadassāvī, samādāya sikkhati sikkhāpadesu. Yaṃ kho panassa bhojanaṃ denti – lūkhaṃ vā paṇītaṃ vā – taṃ sakkaccaṃyeva paribhuñjati avihaññamāno. Jegucchī hoti kāyaduccaritena vacīduccaritena manoduccaritena; jegucchī hoti anekavihitānaṃ pāpakānaṃ akusalānaṃ dhammānaṃ samāpattiyā. Sorato hoti sukhasaṃvāso, na aññe bhikkhū ubbejetā. Yāni kho panassa honti sāṭheyyāni kūṭeyyāni jimheyyāni vaṅkeyyāni, tāni yathā·bhūtaṃ āvikattā hoti satthari vā viññūsu vā sabrahmacārīsu. Tesamassa satthā vā viññū vā sabrahmacārī abhinimmadanāya vāyamati. Sikkhitā kho pana hoti. ‘Kāmaññe bhikkhū sikkhantu vā mā vā, ahamettha sikkhissāmī’ti cittaṃ uppādeti. Gacchanto kho pana ujumaggeneva gacchati; tatrāyaṃ ujumaggo, seyyathidaṃ – sammādiṭṭhi…pe… sammāsamādhi. Āraddhavīriyo viharati – ‘kāmaṃ taco ca nhāru [nahāru (sī. syā. kaṃ. pī.)] ca aṭṭhi ca avasissatu, sarīre upasussatu maṃsalohitaṃ; yaṃ taṃ purisathāmena purisavīriyena purisaparakkamena pattabbaṃ, na taṃ apāpuṇitvā vīriyassa saṇṭhānaṃ bhavissatī’ti. Imehi kho, bhikkhave, aṭṭhahi dhammehi samannāgato bhikkhu āhuneyyo hoti…pe… anuttaraṃ puññakkhettaṃ lokassā’’ti
Here, bhikkhus, the bhikkhu is virtuous restrained in the higher code of rules seeing fear in the slightest fault observes the rules. Whatever food offered to him whether rough or exalted, he partakes them without annoyance. Loathes bodily, verbal and mental misbehaviour and various demeritorious things. Is gentle and has a pleasant abiding not terrifying other bhikkhus. All his craftinesses, fraud and deceit are explained to him by the Teacher or wise co-associates in the holy life. His Teacher, or wise co-associates in the holy life try to subdue him. He makes up his mind: Other bhikkhus may get the training or not get the training. I will be trained. He goes straight ahead. -Such as in right view, ... re ... right concentration. He is with aroused effort, thinking if it happens my skin, veins and bones remain, may flesh and blood dry up. Until there is strength in me, I will make effort to attain, what could be attained through manly strength and vigour. Bhikkhus, the bhikkhu endowed with these eight things becomes reverential, ... re ... the incomparable field of merit for the world.


an8-2 
Sīlavā hoti, pātimokkhasaṃvarasaṃvuto viharati ācāragocarasampanno aṇumattesu vajjesu bhayadassāvī, samādāya sikkhati sikkhāpadesu. Ayaṃ, bhikkhave, catuttho hetu catuttho paccayo ādibrahmacariyikāya paññāya appaṭiladdhāya paṭilābhāya, paṭiladdhāya bhiyyobhāvāya vepullāya bhāvanāya pāripūriyā saṃvattati.
He abides virtuous, restrained in the higher code of rules, conducting himself, seeing fear in the slightest fault. Bhikkhus, this is the fourth reason on account of which wisdom grows, of the fundamentals of a moral life, for those who do not have it, and for the fundamentals of a moral life, to develop, grow and get completed for those who have already gained it.



an4-22 these four are the attributes of an elder
 Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu sīlavā hoti, pātimokkhasaṃvarasaṃvuto viharati ācāragocarasampanno aṇumattesu vajjesu bhayadassāvī, samādāya sikkhati sikkhāpadesu, bahussuto hoti sutadharo sutasannicayo, ye te dhammā ādikalyāṇā majjhekalyāṇā pariyosānakalyāṇā sātthaṃ sabyañjanaṃ [sātthā sabyañjanā (sī. pī.)] kevalaparipuṇṇaṃ [kevalaparipuṇṇā (sī.)] parisuddhaṃ brahmacariyaṃ abhivadanti, tathārūpāssa dhammā bahussutā honti dhātā [dhatā (sī. syā. kaṃ. pī.)] vacasā paricitā manasānupekkhitā, diṭṭhiyā suppaṭividdhā, catunnaṃ jhānānaṃ ābhicetasikānaṃ diṭṭhadhammasukhavihārānaṃ nikāmalābhī hoti akicchalābhī akasiralābhī, āsavānaṃ khayā anāsavaṃ cetovimuttiṃ paññāvimuttiṃ diṭṭheva dhamme sayaṃ abhiññā sacchikatvā upasampajja viharati. Ime kho, bhikkhave, cattāro therakaraṇā dhammā’’ti.
 Here, bhikkhus, the bhikkhu is virtuous restrained in the higher code of rules, pursuing the right course of conduct sees fear in the slightest fault and observes the precepts to train. He becomes learned and bears and treasures what he has learned. The Teaching good at the beginning, middle and the end full of meaning even in the letter explaining the pure and complete holy life. Of such a Teaching he becomes learned, bearing it in words, relaying it in mind and penetrating it to realize. He becomes a gainer for nothing, a gainer without difficulty, a quick gainer of the four higher states of mind, the pleasant abidings here and now. Desroying desires, releasing the mind from desires and released through wisdom, abides here and now having reàlized. Bhikkhus, these four are the attributes of an elder.

 
 an5-87  the elder bhikkhu becomes pleasant, agreeable, developed and honoured by co-associates in the holy life.
 Sīlavā hoti, pātimokkhasaṃvarasaṃvuto viharati. Ācāragocarasampanno aṇumattesu vajjesu bhayadassāvī, samādāya sikkhati sikkhāpadesu; bahussuto hoti sutadharo sutasannicayo, ye te dhammā ādikalyāṇā majjhekalyāṇā pariyosānakalyāṇā sātthaṃ sabyañjanaṃ [sātthā sabyañjanā (sī.)] kevalaparipuṇṇaṃ parisuddhaṃ brahmacariyaṃ abhivadanti, tathārūpāssa dhammā bahussutā honti dhātā [dhatā (sī. syā. kaṃ. pī.)] vacasā paricitā manasānupekkhitā diṭṭhiyā suppaṭividdhā; kalyāṇavāco hoti kalyāṇavākkaraṇo poriyā vācāya samannāgato vissaṭṭhāya anelagaḷāya atthassa viññāpaniyā; catunnaṃ jhānānaṃ ābhicetasikānaṃ diṭṭhadhammasukhavihārānaṃ nikāmalābhī hoti akicchalābhī akasiralābhī; āsavānaṃ khayā anāsavaṃ cetovimuttiṃ paññāvimuttiṃ diṭṭheva dhamme sayaṃ abhiññā sacchikatvā upasampajja viharati. Imehi kho, bhikkhave, pañcahi dhammehi samannāgato thero bhikkhu sabrahmacārīnaṃ piyo ca hoti manāpo ca garu ca bhāvanīyo cā’’ti.
 He becomes virtuous restrained in the higher code of rules. Seeing fear in the slightest fault develops the right behaviour. Becomes learned, bearing and treasuring what he has heard. Of that Teaching good at the beginning, middle and end and explains the complete and pure holy life, he becomes learned, bearing it in mind and experiencing it, sees with penetrating insight. He becomes one endowed with good polite words to explain the meanings. Of the four higher states of the mind, the pleasant abidings he becomes a gainer for nothing, a quick gainer. Having destroyed desires, and releasing the mind and released through wisdom, having realized here and now he abides. Bhikkhus, endowed with these five things the elder bhikkhu becomes pleasant, agreeable, developed and honoured by co-associates in the holy life.
 
 
 an5-109  the bhikkhu endowed with five things belong to the four directions
 bhikkhu cātuddiso hoti. Katamehi pañcahi? Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu sīlavā hoti, pātimokkhasaṃvarasaṃvuto viharati ācāragocarasampanno aṇumattesu vajjesu bhayadassāvī, samādāya sikkhati sikkhāpadesu; bahussuto hoti sutadharo sutasannicayo, ye te dhammā ādikalyāṇā majjhekalyāṇā pariyosānakalyāṇā sātthaṃ sabyañjanaṃ kevalaparipuṇṇaṃ parisuddhaṃ brahmacariyaṃ abhivadanti, tathārūpāssa dhammā bahussutā honti dhātā vacasā paricitā manasānupekkhitā diṭṭhiyā suppaṭividdhā; santuṭṭho hoti itarītaracīvarapiṇḍapātasenāsanagilānappaccayabhesajjaparikkhārena; catunnaṃ jhānānaṃ ābhicetasikānaṃ diṭṭhadhammasukhavihārānaṃ nikāmalābhī hoti akicchalābhī akasiralābhī; āsavānaṃ khayā anāsavaṃ cetovimuttiṃ paññāvimuttiṃ diṭṭheva dhamme sayaṃ abhiññā sacchikatvā upasampajja viharati. Imehi, kho, bhikkhave, pañcahi dhammehi samannāgato bhikkhu cātuddiso hotī’’ti.
 Here, bhikkhus, the bhikkhu is virtuous restrained in the higher code of rules, is endowed with the right conduct, seeing fear in the slightest fault. He is learned, treasures what he has learned of the Teaching that is good at the beginning, middle and end, full of meanings in words and letters that state the complete and pure holy life. He bears that Teaching, practises it verbally and mentally touches it and penetratingly see it. He is satisfied with whatever gain of robes, morsel food, dwellngs and requisites when ill. He is a gainer for nothing, a quick and easy gainer of the four higher states of the mind, the pleasant abidings here and now. Destroying desires, releasing the mind and released through wisdom, here and now he abides having known and realized. Bhikkhus, the bhikkhu endowed with these five things belongs to the four directions.
 
 
 an5-134  the bhikkhu endowed with five factors, living in whatever direction abides with a released mind.
 pañcahi dhammehi samannāgato bhikkhu yassaṃ yassaṃ disāyaṃ viharati, vimuttacittova [vimuttacitto (sī. pī.), vimuttacitto ca (ka.)] viharati. Katamehi pañcahi? Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu sīlavā hoti, pātimokkhasaṃvarasaṃvuto viharati ācāragocarasampanno aṇumattesu vajjesu bhayadassāvī, samādāya sikkhati sikkhāpadesu – rājāva khattiyo muddhāvasitto jātisampanno; bahussuto hoti sutadharo sutasannicayo, ye te dhammā ādikalyāṇā majjhekalyāṇā pariyosānakalyāṇā sātthaṃ sabyañjanaṃ kevalaparipuṇṇaṃ parisuddhaṃ brahmacariyaṃ abhivadanti, tathārūpāssa dhammā bahussutā honti dhātā vacasā paricitā manasānupekkhitā diṭṭhiyā suppaṭividdhā – rājāva khattiyo muddhāvasitto aḍḍho mahaddhano mahābhogo paripuṇṇakosakoṭṭhāgāro; āraddhavīriyo viharati akusalānaṃ dhammānaṃ pahānāya kusalānaṃ dhammānaṃ upasampadāya thāmavā daḷhaparakkamo anikkhittadhuro kusalesu dhammesu – rājāva khattiyo muddhāvasitto balasampanno; paññavā hoti udayatthagāminiyā paññāya samannāgato ariyāya nibbedhikāya sammā dukkhakkhayagāminiyā – rājāva khattiyo muddhāvasitto pariṇāyakasampanno; tassime cattāro dhammā vimuttiṃ paripācenti. So iminā vimuttipañcamena dhammena samannāgato yassaṃ yassaṃ disāyaṃ viharati vimuttacittova viharati. Taṃ kissa hetu? Evañhetaṃ, bhikkhave, hoti vimuttacittāna’’nti. 
 Here, bhikkhus, the bhikkhu is virtuous restrained in the higher code of rules, develops the right behaviour, seeing fear in the slightest fault, thus he observes the rules just as the head anointed warrior king is accomplished at birth. He is learned, treasures what he has learned of the Teaching that is good at the beginning, middle and end, full of meanings in words and letters that state the complete and pure holy life. He bears that Teaching, practises it verbally and mentally touches it and penetratingly see it, as the head anointed warrior king has much wealth and resources with completely filled grain houses and a treasury. He abides with aroused effort firm and zealous to dispel demeritorious things and to accumulate meritorious things, not giving up the main aim. Like the powerful head anointed warrior king. Become wise is endowed with wisdom of the arising and fading of the five holding masses, for the noble penetration, for the rightful ending of unpleasantness. Like the head annointed warrior king endowed with the wonderful adviser. These four factors mature to him in release. Endowed with these factors with release as the fifth, in whichever direction he dwells, he is released. What is the reason? Bhikkhus, it so happens to those released in mind.
 
 
 
 an5-136 the bhikkhu endowed with five things aspires the destruction of desires. What five?
 Evamevaṃ kho, bhikkhave, pañcahi dhammehi samannāgato bhikkhu āsavānaṃ khayaṃ pattheti. Katamehi pañcahi? Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu sīlavā hoti…pe… samādāya sikkhati sikkhāpadesu; bahussuto hoti…pe… diṭṭhiyā suppaṭividdhā; catūsu satipaṭṭhānesu suppatiṭṭhitacitto [supaṭṭhitacitto (sī. syā.), sūpaṭṭhitacitto (ka.)] hoti; āraddhavīriyo viharati akusalānaṃ dhammānaṃ pahānāya, kusalānaṃ dhammānaṃ upasampadāya, thāmavā daḷhaparakkamo anikkhittadhuro kusalesu dhammesu; paññavā hoti, udayatthagāminiyā paññāya samannāgato ariyāya nibbedhikāya sammā dukkhakkhayagāminiyā.
Here, bhikkhus, the bhikkhu is virtuous, ... re ... restrained in the higher code of rules. Is learned, ... re ... penetratingly seeing have attained right view. He is thoroughly established in the four foundations of mindfulness. Abides with aroused effort for dispelling demerit and for amassing merit. Is zealous with firm effort not giving up meritorious things, endowed with the wisdom of noble ones for the rightful destruction unpleasantness.
 
 
 an5-232 the monastery bhikkhu endowed with five things becomes pleasing, agreeable, honourable and developed to the co-associates in the holy life
 Sīlavā hoti, pātimokkhasaṃvarasaṃvuto viharati ācāragocarasampanno aṇumattesu vajjesu bhayadassāvī, samādāya sikkhati sikkhāpadesu; bahussuto hoti sutadharo sutasannicayo, ye te dhammā ādikalyāṇā majjhekalyāṇā pariyosānakalyāṇā sātthaṃ sabyañjanaṃ kevalaparipuṇṇaṃ parisuddhaṃ brahmacariyaṃ abhivadanti, tathārūpāssa dhammā bahussutā honti dhātā vacasā paricitā manasānupekkhitā diṭṭhiyā suppaṭividdhā; kalyāṇavāco hoti kalyāṇavākkaraṇo poriyā vācāya samannāgato vissaṭṭhāya anelagalāya atthassa viññāpaniyā; catunnaṃ jhānānaṃ ābhicetasikānaṃ diṭṭhadhammasukhavihārānaṃ nikāmalābhī hoti akicchalābhī akasiralābhī; āsavānaṃ khayā anāsavaṃ cetovimuttiṃ paññāvimuttiṃ diṭṭheva dhamme sayaṃ abhiññā sacchikatvā upasampajja viharati. Imehi kho, bhikkhave, pañcahi dhammehi samannāgato āvāsiko bhikkhu sabrahmacārīnaṃ piyo ca hoti manāpo ca garu ca bhāvanīyo cā’’ti.
 He is virtuous restrained in the higher code of rules, abides seeing fear in the slightest fault, thus he observes the rules. Learned, bears that Teaching good at the beginning, middle and end, full of meanings even in the letters completely declaring the pure holy life. He learns that Teaching, practises reciting it and experiencing it in the mind penetratingly sees it and rectifies the view. He is polite, and explains the Teaching kindly with words that flow freely. He is a gainer for nothing, a quick and easy gainer of the four higher states of the mind, the pleasant abidings here and now. Destroying desires, and releasing the mind from desires and released through wisdom, he abides here and now knowing and having realized. Bhikkhus, the monastery bhikkhu endowed with these five things becomes pleasing, agreeable, honourable and developed to the co-associates in the holy life.
 
 
 an7-75  the bhikkhu endowed with these seven things is a bearer of the discipline
 bhikkhu vinayadharo hoti. Katamehi sattahi? Āpattiṃ jānāti, anāpattiṃ jānāti, lahukaṃ āpattiṃ jānāti, garukaṃ āpattiṃ jānāti, sīlavā hoti pātimokkhasaṃvarasaṃvuto viharati ācāragocarasampanno aṇumattesu vajjesu bhayadassāvī samādāya sikkhati sikkhāpadesu, catunnaṃ jhānānaṃ ābhicetasikānaṃ diṭṭhadhammasukhavihārānaṃ nikāmalābhī hoti akicchalābhī akasiralābhī, āsavānaṃ khayā anāsavaṃ cetovimuttiṃ paññāvimuttiṃ diṭṭheva dhamme sayaṃ abhiññā sacchikatvā upasampajja viharati. Imehi kho, bhikkhave, sattahi dhammehi samannāgato bhikkhu vinayadharo hotī’’ti. Paṭhamaṃ.
He knows ecclestiastical offences, the non-ecclestiastical offences, the light ecclestiastical offences, the heavy ecclestiastical offences, is virtuous restrained in the higher cods of rules, observes the precepts seeing fear in the slightest fault, becomes the gainer without a wish, without doing anything and quickly, of the four higher states of the mind. The pleasant abidings here and now. Destroying desires, the mind released and released through wisdom, abides having realized here and now. The bhikkhu endowed with these seven things is a bearer of the discipline.


